This paper addresses the problem of exact local alignment and presents animplementation of the algorithm introduced in already published literature(Retzlaff and Stadler, 2018). The paper does not interoduce any originalresult. Another main concern is the following: when it is about multiplelocal alignment, due to the tractability issues, in the literture it ismandatory to execute some filtering step. Especially in this case, headsand tails of sequences might be quickly removed at start, as well as ahuge portion of the whole input, gaining a lot of computation time.Authors should include this in the discussion and consider to add afiltering step to their software. There are lossless filters (e.g.Peterlongo et al. Lossless filter for multiple repeats with bounded editdistance. Algorithms for Molecular Biology 4 (2009)) that guarantee not toremove real high quality alignments. For the case of Hamming distance youcan look up the following instead: Peterlongo et al. Lossless filter formultiple repetitions with Hamming distance. J. Discrete Algorithms 6(3):497-509, 2008. MINOR COMMENTS - The "while" at third line of abstractshould be removed. From the semantic point of view, I would actuallyrevise the whole sentence as it is not really true that it is typical tocompute exact dynamic programming. I'd rather write that, if one wants tocompute exact alignments, then dynamic programming is the tool. Finally,please add some commas in last sentence of abstract. - Introduction:"usually gapless patterns". This is not true: if you do not allow gaps,then there is no point to use dynamic programming (DP) and quadraticalgorithms. When you use DP it means that you allow insertions anddeletions.

The authors present a software solution, vaPLA, to perform exact pairwisesequence alignments. The paper is very well organized, well written, andit presents a good background on sequence alignment technics. The tool isevaluated against the main multiple alignment tools, and the results aregood, regarding accuracy. The same is not followed for performance, butthis was already expected. The presentation of the tool is reduced, and Iwonder why the authors didn’t include a link to the source code, or to ajar file, so that results can be replicated. Revise, in the abstract,“While multiple sequence …, while pairwise..”

The manuscript is correctly organized and written, in general, and itprovides the implementation counterpart of the methods contained in(Retzlaff and Stadler, 2018). Although the quality of the manuscript andits contents is appropriate for their acceptance in the conference, thefollowing comments might improve its quality: 1. References are somewhatunbalanced. With the exception of (Retzlaff and Stadler, 2018), (Baichooand Ouzounis, 2017), (Schirmer and Giegerich, 2013) and three morereferences from the circle of P. F. Stadler (2015, 2017, 2011) the rest ofthe references are dated 2010 or before. Some more references (possiblyout of P. F. Stadler's circle) covering the last five years would make themanuscript more attractive in an updated context. Notice that 33references are cited and that most of them do not add value to themanuscript in terms of timeliness. 2. While the manucript is correctlywritten it requires additional proof editing: double while in the secondsentence of the Abstract; on the hand --> on the one hand (p. 1); extra`)´ in p. 1 (last paragraph); straightforwards --> straightforward (p. 2);die --> the (p. 2), etc. 3. Please place Fig. 1 in p. 3 rather than in p.2.
